Post: Monitoring with GitHub actions (#14)
manabie-com/manabie-com.github.io: content/posts/monitoring-with-github-actions/index.md

+++
date = "2022-03-30T17:10:49+07:00"
author = "ds0nt"
description = "Using Github Actions to run some of your monitoring tasks on a schedule."
title = "Using Github Actions for Daily Monitoring Tasks"
categories = ["DevSecOps", "Automation", "CI"]
tags = ["DevOps", "Github Actions", "Monitoring", "CRON", "Schedule"]
slug = "github-actions-for-monitoring-tasks"
+++

# Using Github Actions for Daily Monitoring Tasks

Github actions has a CRON schedule trigger we can use run scripts on a custom schedule. It's pretty cool that Github Actions can run jobs on a CRON schedule, and we can use this ability to cover some of our dev-ops needs.

> For example, we used this to check if any of our domain certificates were close to their expiry. Each day, a github action  runs at 10:45, checks if our certificates are dangerously close to expiring, and posts to our `#monitoring` Slack if any of them are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, we use this to check if any of our domain certificates are close to their expiry. Each day, a github action  runs at 10:45, checks if our certificates are dangerously close to expiring, and posts to our `#monitoring` Slack if any of them are.
```
probably should use present tense I think

### The Workflow

This is a simple monitoring flow really; Run Check -> Alert if Problem.

> To do this, were going to use three Github actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, we are going to use a Github action with 3 sequential jobs.
```

1. an action to checkout our code
2. an action to execute a script
3. and an action to send slack message based on our condition.

```yaml
# github/workflows/check_weather.yml`

> name: check_weather

Reviewer: The previous section was talking about certificate expiry, but this section is checking weather instead. This flow is a bit awkward and confusing to me.

Maybe we can add this paragraph:

```sh
For simplification and to focus on Github Action, the following example checks and 
reports bad weather instead of our server's certificate. In practice, we can use the 
example to check anything necessary.
```

on:

>   schedule: # run at 010:45 UTC daily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  schedule: # run at 10:45 UTC daily
```

    - cron: '45 10 * * *'
  workflow_dispatch: # runnable manually.

jobs:
  check-weather:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:

      # checkout code
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
     
      # run script
      - name: Check Weather
        shell: bash
        run: ./check-weather.sh
      

>       # post results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # post results
      # note that this step only runs when the previous step fails
```

### Writing the Check Script

We need to perform some check (like the weather), and exit with status 0 if it's ok, or exit with a non-zero status if theres a problem.

```bash
# check-weather.sh

#!/bin/bash

# fetch the temperature
TEMPERATURE=$(curl 'wttr.in/Ho_Chi_Minh?format=3' | cut -d' ' -f4 | grep -oE '[+-][0-9]+')

# test if the temperature is ok
if [[ $TEMPERATURE -le 20 ]]; then
	MESSAGE="Dress warm, it's a chilly $TEMPERATURE outside"
elif [[ $TEMPERATURE -ge 30 ]]; then
	MESSAGE="Its going to be hot. The temperature is $TEMPERATURE"
fi

# if it was ok, we can exit 0
[[ -n $MESSAGE ]] || exit 0

# otherwise, we set the SLACK_MESSAGE env var for the next step, and exit 1.
echo 'SLACK_MESSAGE<<EOF' >> $GITHUB_ENV
echo -e "$MESSAGE" >> $GITHUB_ENV
echo 'EOF' >> $GITHUB_ENV
exit 1
```
Once your ready to run your workflow, make sure it's merged into your main github branch, for us it's `develop`.

> Then it will run on it's CRON schedule, and you can also dispatch it manually from the actions page to run the check immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then it will run on its CRON schedule, and you can also trigger it manually from the actions page to run the check immediately.
```
